so a calculator app looks like it
centers the array of buttons in portrait
so you can see on the screen there but
if we move over to the landscape layout
it's obvious that things aren't centered
in fact I'll be back in portrait we've
taken advantage of the fact that the
layout contains a scented widget that's
very close to the width of the buttons
so we're able to constrain the key
button which every call was button 7 to
the new number in a text widget and have
something that looks pretty central on
the screen we didn't really Center the
buttons though and obviously in layers
okay it becomes very obvious that we
didn't now the landscape layer does
still work quite well and you may not
actually even feel that the buttons
should be centered as they look all
right where they are now I tend to agree
but it is useful to know how to Center a
group of widgets and this is a good
opportunity to look at a couple of ways
to do this now for this particular layer
there's actually a third approach you
could take and that's using chains and
these became available with a recent
release of the constraint layout but
there was no support for them in the
Android studio to layout designer you
know they're not always appropriate
which is why I'm showing you these other
two approaches first and in fact I'll
create a separate video to show you how
to use chains later so in the next few
videos we're going to have a look at one
way we can Center groups of widgets I've
been kind of set your challenge to
Center them another way and if you keep
in mind the concept of a key widget that
all the others are constrained to then
you should be able to work the challenge
out so you want to start off with the
calculator app loaded in Android studio
yes I've got and open the landscape
version of the layout for editing and I
suggest you close down the project pane
as well so that there's more room on the
screen and again I've done that so what
we're going to do is we're going to
start by centering the to edit text
widgets now because there's only two of
those it's easier to then see what's
going on first I'm going to show you
guidelines which is what we're going to
be using to constrain the widgets tune
now god lines don't appear in the
palette of widgets but you can place one
on the layout by right-clicking the
layout and selecting helpers I can come
down here and select helpers and I can
click on add vertical
or add horizontal guideline now because
we want to Center things horizontally
we're going to be choosing the option to
add vertical guidelines but you can also
come up here to the toolbar there's an
option there to add a vertical guideline
or horizontal guideline so I'm going to
click on add vertical guideline and by
the way it's easy to see this in the
blueprint because it doesn't show in the
designer until you move the mouse over
into the designer side but I've got it
cook this set up in blueprint mode as
you can see and by the way sometimes
when you go to add a guideline it
doesn't appear and you can see here that
it didn't appear for me when I did that
but you can come down here into the
component tree and you can see that it's
been added and the bottom one you can
click on there to select it now
guidelines have widths and properties
showing on the right-hand properties
panel as you can see over here when I've
clicked it but there's little point
changing them and that's because they
don't behave like normal widgets and the
documentation which I'll take you to now
you can see the link on the screen there
it actually mentions that vertical
guidelines have a width of 0 and the
height of the constraint layout parent
and horizontal guidelines have a height
of 0 and the width of their constraint
layout parent so in other words there's
no point altering the layout width and
layout height attributes for a guideline
in fact there's no point altering any of
their attributes the only thing you can
change is how far along the layout they
are if you go back to Android studio so
you can drag them left and right
to position them on the land now
obviously a horizontal guideline would
be dragged up and down instead so
although I'm working with a vertical
guideline here the same thing applies to
horizontal guidelines just the other way
around now the guidelines got a measure
showing how far along the left and left
edge of the height we are as a
percentage and if I just dragged it over
a little bit you can see that number is
increasing as I'm dragging it over to
the right now I can also measure from
the right edge instead by clicking on
the top of the guideline so I want to do
that now and you can see the number has
now changed and we will actually and
we're actually now measuring from the
right hand side to the left in fact each
time it's eclectic switches from left I
can click on it again and went to right
when I click on it again
it's now in percentage - and that's a
percentage of how far along from either
from the left-hand side that we're
positioned at the moment and keeping
like that sometimes these don't work
quite right until you actually move in a
little bit so you might have to move the
guideline before this takes effect but
I'm actually going to move this over now
to exactly 50% which is a percentage so
therefore what's directly in the middle
of the screen and as I mentioned before
I suggest you close the project pane and
work just with the blueprint because
that gives you more space to see what's
going on so again if I want this
guideline centered which I do you just
need to click until we get the
percentage showing and then move it and
so it's on 50% and we're now directly
centered in the middle of the layout so
what I'm going to do now is delete the
right-hand constraint of the new number
widget then I'm going to constrain it to
the guideline instead I want to come
over here select the new number Widgit
I'm going to delete the constraint which
is currently constrained to the result
edit text delete that but then I'm going
to constrain it to the guideline instead
so you can see over there now the right
sorry the result and it Texas consistent
is constrained at the moment to the
right hand side but we'll leave that
what we're going to do is I'm going to
select that and we're going to now
constrain that to the guideline on its
left like so and both the new number and
result edittext Sanel constrained to the
guideline so basically centered in there
half of a layup as a result of what
we've done now before I go any further
it's going to be a lot easy to clear all
the constraints on the layout and
recreate them rather than trying to crit
to what change the various button
constraints and that's because if you
miss one it can slow you down while you
try to work out or something's not
working so in other words when you're
making a radical change to a layout as
we're about to do here my suggestion is
to clear all the constraints first using
the clear-all constraint buttons on the
toolbar and this is also a good time to
make sure that auto connect is turned
off so I'm going to come over here you
can see that AutoCAD X turned off but
I'm going to click on the key role
constraints button this one here to
remove all constraints all right so now
what I'm going to do is I'm going to
recreate the constraints for the two
edit text we
it's constraining them on their inner
edges to the guideline and also to the
top of the layout let's go ahead and do
that starting with new number constrain
it to the guideline and also constrain
it to the top of the layout I'm also
going to constrain result the guideline
and also to the top now there's no need
to constrain their outer edges but you
can't do that if you want to if you
decide to do that set the layout with
attributes to match constraint for each
edit text rather than a wrapper let's
call content but I'm not going to do
that and in addition you could use a
baseline constraint to line them up
vertically if you prefer which is what
we had before I deleted all the
constraints all right now the margins
that I've set are a little bit too or
leaves the and it takes a little bit
close to each other so let's actually
change their inner margins to 16 DP
instead I'm gonna go ahead and for the
new number
edit text change it to 16 and then for
the result change its left constraint to
16 as well just a little bit further
apart now at this point we can't switch
to portrait to check the centering and
that's because portrait uses a different
layout and that brings up something that
you want to bear in mind is if you
create if you decide to create different
portrait and landscape layouts for your
app when you do so you've got two
layouts to maintain instead of just one
so if you can make a single layout work
in both modes then it does make life a
lot easier to do that now what we can do
here is try different devices though and
I'm gonna see how this looks on another
device by clicking on the option on the
toolbar let's just try selecting a nexus
one let's see what that looks like so it
looks like a horizontally anyway because
of course the buttons are still dropping
off the bottom of the screen but at the
moment we're just considering the
horizontal alignment so that's good it's
working okay so let's go back to our
Nexus 4 it's easier to use it because
it's going to be a little bit easy to
work with the buttons so to send to the
buttons what we need is a god we need
the guideline to run down the gap
between the button 8 and but annoying so
in other words there's two groups of
buttons one on the left-hand side and
one on the right-hand side of the card
line so we know ahead
a different key button so instead of
everything being aligned to button seven
or the other buttons will take their
lead from button nine now I could use
button eight instead the important thing
he said it's a button at the top and
next to the guideline and I thought it
easy to work with just the blueprint for
things like this and I've obviously been
just using the blueprint in this video
but that way everything's much bigger on
the screen and we've got more space to
work with now you can also use the plus
button over here if you want to zoom
everything up which can make creating
the constraints a lot easier and also
collapsing the palette and the
componentry gives more space to the
screen or on the screen as well so I'm
going to go ahead and do that close
those two off just so we've got a little
bit more space to look at then things as
it seemed up a little bit more all right
so we're going to split the group of
buttons into two with button Owen on the
right-hand side of the guideline and
button eight on the left so on the right
each button in the second column
starting with the slash we'll need a
baseline constraint to the button on its
left and it should also have its left
edge constrained to the right edge of
the button on its left so let's start by
splitting the two groups of buttons I'm
going to get the first row the right
edge button that the eight of the
buttons that's darling with nine six
three and equals and move them over to
the right-hand side of the guideline for
now so if now got our groups of buttons
and two different sides there on the
right as I mentioned each button in the
second column that's starting with the
slash here that needs a baseline
constraint to the button on its left and
it should also have a left it have its
left edge constrained to the right edge
of the button on the slip so let's go
ahead and do that we're going to open up
the baseline constrain that to the nine
likewise for the asterisks or the
multiplication baseline and come over
here and add that to the six next one
any minors we're going to do the same
baseline and constrain it oops
based on constraint there and then the
plus we're going to do the same thing
and strain of this you can see there
when for each of those four buttons as
well we should have its left edge and
strain to the right edge of the button
on its left so a similar thing there
we're going to click on that and
constrain it for all four
okay so you can see that we've got a
baseline constraint for each of these
now and we've also got the constraint
it's on the on the left for each one
constrained to the right of the buttons
on its left alright so next we need to
constrain the top edge of each button in
the first column to be ATP from the
button above it so start basically
starting with the six and working down
the column let's go ahead and do that so
the six I'm going to constrain to the
nine I'm going to make sure you've got a
margin of eight which we can see in the
inspector the three we're going to
constrain to the six and checking on the
DP wheel ATP they're showing in the
inspector in an equal sign I'm also
going to constrain to the three as you
can see there okay so that's all done
now finally those three buttons these
three buttons here the six the three and
the equals in this case they should have
their left edges constrained to the left
edge of the button above again the
starting with six so let's do that so
with the six I'm going to left
constrained with a nine with a three
we're going to constrain to the six and
with the equals we're going to constrain
to the three but where I'm going to do
that is also change the margins for six
to zero so that it lines up correctly
for three to zero and also the equals to
zero as well okay and you saw that they
appeared to be snipped until it changed
or they left margin to zero which I've
done there so at this point now I should
be able to drag the nine button around
and the other seven buttons will follow
with it you can see that that's actually
working and it's working quite nicely so
I could have actually done this work on
the left-hand side so I could have
actually instead of moving these
manually which I did I drag them over I
could have done all the work until they
were all constrain together then just
drag the one button over instead of
doing what I did which was select all
eight buttons and then we drag over that
way either way would would have worked
just fine all right so let's end the
video here in the next video we need to
start working on the left-hand side of
the block and that's going to be a
mirror image to what we've done to the
buttons on the right so I'll see you in
the next